---
Author: Taha Azzaoui
Date: Jul 14, 2018 
Title: Snell's Law and the Thin Lens Equation 
---

![Figure 1: Snell\'s Law.](images/snells-law0.jpg)

### Introduction

The principal aim of the field of ray optics is to study the behavior of
light and describe how it interacts with its surroundings. It is
important to note that in the context of ray optics, we assume the ray
model of light. That is, we avoid discussing electromagnetic radiation
as a whole and treat light as a ray in the mathematical sense, i.e. a
line that starts at some point and extends to infinity in some defined
direction. One of the most fundamental equations under this model is
Snell\'s law, which defines the relationship between a ray\'s angle of
incidence and its angle of refraction with respect to the material it
inhabits. Suppose for example, a ray of light is to penetrate the
surface of a body of water. We define \$\\theta\_1\$ to be the ray\'s
angle of incidence, (i.e. the angle the ray makes with the norm of the
surface upon entrance) and \$\\theta\_2\$ to be the angle of refraction
(i.e. the angle made with the norm of the surface upon exit). We then
define the refractive index of a material (denoted \$n\$) to be a
measure of how light propagates through that material). Intuitively, we
would expect the refractive index of air to be smaller than that of a
more translucent material like glass. Snell\'s law states that the
relationship between these two quantities is as follows
\$\$n\_1sin(\\theta\_1) = n\_2sin(\\theta\_2) \\tag{1}\$\$ Where
\$\\theta\_1\$ and \$\\theta\_2\$ are the angles of incidence and
refraction respectively, and \$n\_1\$ and \$n\_2\$ are the refractive
indices of the medium of origin and destination respectively.

### The Thin Lens Equation

![Figure 2: A Thin Lens.](images/snells-law1.jpg){.center}

An interesting phenomenon arises when light interacts with a converging
lens. Lenses such as the one in Figure 2, can produce an inverted image
of an object under certain conditions. To dive deeper, we must introduce
the concept focal length. The focal length of a lens, is the distance
from the lens to the point where light converges onto the surface, the
focal point. Simply put, the focal length is a measure of how \"zoomed
in\" a lens is. As it turns out, there is a relationship between the
distance between an object and a lens, the distance between that
object\'s image and the lens, and the lens\'s focal point. Using some
simple geometry, we can derive this relationship as follows. Turning our
attention now to Figure 2, we have an object \$AB\$ placed beyond the
point \$C\$, of which an inverted image, \$A\'B\'\$ forms beyond the
point \$G\$. From similar triangles \$\\Delta A\'B\'G\$ and \$\\Delta
EDG\$, we have \$\$\\frac{A\'B\'}{ED} = \\frac{GA\'}{EG} \\tag{2}\$\$
Note that since \$AB = ED\$, we also have \$\$\\frac{A\'B\'}{AB} =
\\frac{GA\'}{EG} \\tag{3}\$\$ Furthermore, from similar triangles
\$\\Delta A\'B\'E\$ and \$\\Delta ABE\$, we have \$\$\\frac{A\'B\'}{AB}
= \\frac{EA\'}{EA} \\tag{4}\$\$ Combining (3) and (4), we have
\$\$\\frac{GA\'}{EG} = \\frac{EA\'}{EA} \\tag{5}\$\$ We can express
\$GA\'\$ as \$EA\' - EG\$ \$\$\\frac{GA\'}{EG} = \\frac{EA\'}{EA}
\\tag{6}\$\$ We can then express these lengths in terms of distance and
focal length \$\$\\frac{d\_1 - f}{f} = \\frac{d\_1}{d\_0} \\tag{7}\$\$
Finally, after cross-multiplying and dividing both sides by \$d\_0 d\_1
f\$, we arrive at the final expression \$\$\\frac{1}{f} =
\\frac{1}{d\_1} + \\frac{1}{d\_0} \\tag{8}\$\$
